+++ 
date = 2024-01-12T19:45:35+02:00
title = "I once almost burned out"
description = "When I was close to burnout."
tags = ["productivity"]
slug = "burnout"
+++
I have been very close to burnout two times in my career. At the same employer.
Both times, the following held:

 * **Tight deadline.** I had an urgent project on my shoulders with a very very
   tight deadline. In one of the cases, I also had a planned vacation starting
   within a week - and I feared having to cancel the entire sailing trip with
   my friends (it was my boat).
 * **Low capacity.** I had known the project was coming any day for weeks but
   was unable to start working on it. As such, my mental and emotional capacity
   was already strained.
 * **I was alone.** I had no one to delegate to and was solely on my own. I was
   the only person who knew the (DevOps) work that needed to be done. Despite
   me flagging for 6-12 months that I needed to offload some responsibilities.
   I felt helpless.
 * **Constant nudging.** The project was the highest priority project in the
   company. Everyone kept asking me how it was going, requesting status
   updates, or if they could help (they could not - see the previous bullet).
 * I **worked day and night**.

Strictly speaking, I was not fully burned out; I was able to get out of bed, but
my entire body was shaking, I was unable to sleep, was annoyed, body
temperature was fluctuating between too hot & too cold, and I had anxiety.

My stress threshold was significantly lower for a few years (and still is) and
these experiences have made me have a deep respect and compassion for people
dealing with burnout. Getting out of it is slow and painful. What makes matters
worse, you can't _work_ yourself out of it.

These experiences have also had a large impact on my career and the way I
approach work ever since:

I no longer accept being the only person who knows something. I build teams, I
share knowledge, I pair/mob/ensemble program, I document things, and I work in
small increments such that someone else can take over at any point in time.

I practice saying "no". It's hard, but I will not accept the alternative
fallout of getting burned out.

I respect a "no" from other people much more.

I try to support people in stressful situations as much as I can. This also
makes me a much better teammate, and generally a more compassionate person.

About a year ago, I was in a similar position with a project. This was at least
four years since my last encounter. I was annoyed and stressed. After a
day or two I realized the project had all the similarities with my previous two
occasions of burnout. With the support of a great manager, I said no, and moved
out of the project to a supporting role.

I guess my near-burnout still lives in my body.
